The logging.properties file

This document leads you through setup of the jdk logger. This document
is part of a sample project that you can use to understand
all the elements of working with the logger.

These are the topics:
1. About the configuration file logging.properties
2. Setting up a log output directory
3. Setting up a formatter (if you want to change the output appearance of logs)
4. Modifying logging.properties
5. Informing the JVM about the location of logging.properties, 
log output files, and your custom formatter.

1. About logging.properties

Java provides a default configuration of its logger in
a file logging.properties. This file is placed by default 
in the /jre/lib folder in any jdk distribution. 
This file allows you to set up separate loggers for console display 
and logs stored in files; allows you to set independent levels; 
and allows you to specify details about how logs 
should be formatted and named, and where they should be stored. 

In this project, logging.properties has been placed in the
resources folder---this is a typical best practice for storing 
logging.properties in a real project.

The version of logging.properties that you have here
has been modified in various ways -- your professor can explain
to you the details. Note that a ConsoleHandler and a FileHandler
have been configured. 

2. Set up the log output directory

You may specify the log output directory in logging.properties, but
before using it, you must create this location manually in the 
file system.

In this project, for convenience, 
we have created a folder logs that will contain log outputs,
but the log folder does not need to be placed inside a project (and usually
should not be placed there).

3. Setting up a Formatter

There are two types of outputs for log messages: console output and
file output. The default formatting for file outputs is a kind of
XML format. This can be used by a log analyzer and is probably the
best choice.

The default formatter for console output gives a lot of information --
a time and date stamp, information about the origin of the message,
the level, in addition to the message itself. Each message requires
two lines of display.

I have created a custom formatter to make the console messages much
briefer. This formatter is called VerySimpleFormatter, located in the
util package.

4. Modifying logging.properties

A. FileHandler: You must specify the full pathname of the location of the directory
you intend to use for logs, and also give the log files a name; you specify
this full pathname,
using the separator '/', as the value for java.util.logging.FileHandler.pattern.
We have used the pattern
   log%g.txt
to specify the log file name.
The %g token lets you tell the JVM you are expecting multiple log files. The
value you provide for java.util.logging.FileHandler.count 
tells it how many (rotating) log files you wish to have.
If you want 2, then log%g.txt tells it to first create the file log0.txt and
fill it up, then move on to log1.txt, fill it up, then return to log0.txt, and so on.

B. Specifying a Formatter: If you want to specify a different format for logs,
you must provide a Java class that does the formatting, and you must specify
in logging.properties where the class is located. Here, we are using
VerySimpleFormatter.java, located in util. This location has been specified
as the value of java.util.logging.ConsoleHandler.formatter, as part of
the ConsoleHandler configuration.

5. Telling the JVM where you have put logging.properties 
 
a.	Create a Run Configuration for your project: In Eclipse, highlight 
the Main class in mainpackage, right-click, Run As > Run Configurations.
b.	Specify the Project (Logging) and the name of the class (mainpackage.Main),
and give the Run Configuration a name -- we call it MainWithLogger. 
c.	In the Arguments tab, type into the VM Arguments area something like the following line: 
(forward slashes should be used – no spaces -- adapt to your own environment)
-Djava.util.logging.config.file=D:/courses/FPP/FPP-2015-Standard/workspace/Logging/src/resources/logging.properties
	